It's time to talk a little
bit about service workers.
Again, this is not a workshop on service
workers, you have Frontend Masters
in the library, many workshops
covering the service workers part.
But because it has to do with a lot
of APIs that we will see later today,
we have to create our own service worker
and actually cover the basics, okay?
Of what a service worker is.
Before getting into the details,
maybe I will ask you.
Does anyone have a definition for
a service worker?
What's a service worker, yeah?
>> It's a separate thread of JavaScript
that runs in the background and can be
registered to access additional APIs and
are required for a PWA to be a full PWA.
>> Okay, so you mentioned,
it's a thread that runs in the background.
We come back to the background definition.
So it's a thread that runs in
the background and has some APIs.
So let me change that word to,
they have some abilities, okay?
To do some things that are necessary for
PWAs.
That's what you said, right?
Well, it's true,
everything is true what you said.
The last one is changing for next year.
Not sure if you know that.
So a PWA won't require a service
worker for Chrome later next year.
They are already experimenting with that,
and if you are not providing
a service worker, the PWA will have
a default offline page saying that, yeah,
you're offline, this app is not working,
something like that.
But it will trigger the installation of
your PWA even if you don't have a service
worker, okay?
That's something new that
they announced a month ago.
So a service worker is a thread, and
I think that the most important
part is runs in the background.
I will change that runs in the background
with it has its own lifecycle that I will
show you in a minute.
And it has abilities, okay?
And that's the part that it's
different from a web worker.
Because a web worker is also a thread,
we can say that it also runs
in the background, okay?
It doesn't have its own lifecycle,
it's attached to the top.
I'm talking about the thread.
But it has no abilities, the web worker.
A worker you have to thread for
it's a worker thread.
So it just has to do some heavy work,
but the service worker has abilities.
The most common abilities,
the one that we won't cover today,
is the one that will serve
files when we are offline.
And that's what makes the PWA
offline capable, okay?
So it acts like a web server,
but installed on user's device.
So that's kind of a definition.
So it's a JavaScript file running
in its own thread that will act as
a middleware offering a local
installed web server or web proxy for
your PWA, including resources and
API calls.
That's a definition.
So, anyway, what is important for
service worker is that it runs
client-side in the browser's engine.
HTTPS is required.
It's installed by a web page.
Any HTML, any navigation context
can install service worker.
It has its own thread and
its own lifecycle, and
we will probably today
cover the lifecycle.
We care about that because we
care about background execution.
And after it's installed,
it will act as a network proxy or
local web server in the name
of the real server.
That's the part that we will skip today,
okay?
If you wanna learn more about that,
there are plenty of content in
the Frontend Masters library.
And it has ability to
run in the background.
That's the other part that we care today.
The abilities of a service
worker to run code in
the background in the name of our web app,
okay?
And there is no need for
user's permission.
You have never seen
a dialog asking you for
permission to install a service worker.
It's being installed
silently by the browser.
Just visiting the website that
is complying with, at least,
HTTPS, the browser will install
the service worker, okay?
That's how we work.
We are going to code
the service worker in a minute.
This is kind of how diagram looks like.
We have our PWA, our website.
Remember, PWA is just another name for
a web app, okay?
A website, the web app, a PWA,
I need some middleware.
Middleware means that it's a piece of
software that it can be there or not, and
the rest should work anyway, okay?
So if we remove the service
worker the rest should work.
Yeah, it won't have those
enhanced abilities, but
it should work anyway, okay?
So everything that we're going to do in
our service worker should work, okay?
Yeah, it won't work in the background, but
the rest of the actual work
that's kind of idea, okay?
And it's a proxy, so
it's actually can see everything
that happens between your PWA and
the cloud,
being your server or
cross-domain servers, okay?
That's kind of the idea.
But what we care most about
service workers is the lifecycle.
So the service worker is installed and
it goes through an install event, okay?
That probably we won't use today.
After it's installed, it's waiting.
Waiting for what?
It's waiting for
being the active service worker.
Only one service worker can
be active in one scope.
What's a scope?
A folder within your server.
So that means that you can
have several service workers,
if they have several folders as scopes.
It's not a common scenario.
The most common scenario is you have one
service worker in the root folder of your
domain, of your host.
So then you have one service worker for
your whole origin.
That's the most common scenario,
but that's not mandatory.
You can have more than one service worker,
but
each service worker will have
its own sub-folder, okay?
That's how it works.
That's tricky when we are doing
background execution.
Because in that case sometimes,
for example,
who is going to receive the push message?
We'll talk about that later,
if we have several service workers, okay?
So that's kind of tricky.
But anyway, I was saying that,
after it's installed, it's waiting.
Waiting for what?
For being the active one.
And why it's not the active
one immediately?
Because, maybe,
there was another one installed before.
And the browser is not killing
the one that is loaded and
replacing it immediately with a new one.
So it's waiting for
being in the background, probably, or
it's waiting for that page to disappear.
Or the page that was having that the
previous service worker it's waiting for
it to disappear and
then it's replacing the new one, okay?
But that's not what I care the most today,
about the lifecycle,
I care about the execution.
Immediately after a service
worker is installed and
activated, it go to an idle state.
So it's in memory, doing nothing, okay?
But then some events
can happen in the page,
or in any page from that origin.
Like a fetch, like a push, a message, and
there are more events
that we will see later.
When some of these events happen, or
they are triggered by the browser,
now your service worker is running.
So it has execution rights
in it's own thread, okay?
After a while, then you finished,
you stop your tasks, you're doing nothing,
you're idle again.
And after a while, the browser will
stop you, because you're doing nothing.
Nothing needs to be done, okay?
So, okay, goodbye.
Even if the user is using your web app,
okay?
You have the web app on the screen.
So the service worker has
its own lifecycle, and
I will show you in a second a demo.
If another event happens, a fetch, a push,
events that we will see later,
the service worker is back to running.
And that second execution might not
be the same instance as before.
So it's the same service worker file,
but it's creating a new context.
So if you have saved a variable, a global
variable, in the previous instance,
it's not there now.
Make sense?
So let me show you this in action before
actually writing our own service worker.
So if you have never seen this,
I encourage you to go
to chrome://serviceworker-internals,
serviceworker-internals, okay?
That's the URL I'm using right now,
chrome://serviceworker-internals.
So here you will see right now all
the service workers that are actually
installed in your device,
in your computer or mobile device.
And I have, probably, I don't wanna
say thousands, but for sure, hundreds.
For example here, I have a service
worker for Brazil city JS conference.
So I spoke at that conference and
it seems like I went to the website and
that website installed a service worker.
Is it running?
Is it executing go in the background?
Well, here we can see it's installed,
it's activated, but
the running styles is stopped.
So it's not executing code, and
it will be like that until something
happens on that website that
triggers the service worker again.
What may happen?
One, a network request, so
I'm going to the website again.
But the other things that might happen
are all the background operations that I
mentioned before.
Sync, pending sync,
a periodic background sync,
a fetch, a payment handler for
pre-authorization, or a push, okay?
Let me show you the simplest one.
What happens if I open now a new window on
the same browser, and I go to the website?
Even if I'm going to any URL, so
that's Brazil, I'm from Argentina.
We are kind of enemies in soccer,
football, and many other things.
So I can say Argentina is better.
That's a URL I'm trying, okay?
By the way, I didn't plan this,
it's just live.
Of course that should give me a 404,
I guess, right?
But even a 404, it doesn't matter,
Now my service worker is running, okay?
Seems like there isn't.
But 404 it's a blank screen.
Anyway, it doesn't matter.
It seems like they don't agree
with Argentina is better.
Now it's running.
So, what happens if I close my window,
okay?
So I'm going to close my tab or my window.
Some of you will expect
running to go to stop.
But that's not the case,
it's still running.
It has its own lifecycle.
So it's running in the background.
Because, technically,
I don't have any window now Pointing
to that Brazil city JS conference website.
After a couple of seconds,
now it goes to stop.
Because it was idle, it was doing nothing.
After a while, the browser says,
okay, you know what?
We're done, and maybe we will be done for
a month, or years, or forever, who knows?
If I never came back to that URL, or
there is no pending background operation,
I don't know what the tool is.
Anyway, so that's a proof that the service
worker has its own lifecycle, okay?
And, in fact,
here I can also start it from there.
Can you see that, there is a Start?
If I hit Start, the tool appears, but
there is no window, it's running.
Where is it running?
In the background.
So a service worker can be executing
code in the background with no window,
with no client,
that's the actual term within
the service worker respect,
that actually needs it.
So the service worker it's our agent
that can actually execute code in
the background even if
the browser is closed.
And here, I need to use closed in quotes.
What happens if I close Chrome,
the last window?
Well, this is the last window,
I think, yeah.
Am I closing Chrome?
So I closed all the windows, but
the Chrome process is still in memory.
In fact, in MacOS, I can actually see
it there, even if there are no windows.
On Windows, the OS,
it happens something similar.
You can close it, you don't see any
windows, it doesn't appear in the.
But anyway, the process is still there.
And you can see the process
in the task manager.
A service worker can execute code,
can wake up and execute code,
even if the user is not even
seen the browser has opened.
And the same happens on Android.
It can be completely in the background.
Again, I cannot do whatever I want.
It needs to be under
the browser's API's umbrella,
whatever the browser is
offering to me to execute code.
And for
now we have five specific use cases.
The APIs that I mentioned,
background sync, periodic background sync,
background fledge, Web Push,
and payment handler.
Those are the use cases where my service
worker can wake up in the background,
no matter what, and execute some code.